
---
date: 2007-10-07 16:02
tags: Linux
title: Ubuntu 7.10 Beta Issues
---

I'm still getting used to using Ubuntu 7.10 beta on my Macbook.

## Unresolved Bugs

* The bottom task-switcher bar sometimes disappears.
* Firefox doesn't quit cleanly - it always crashes.
  * No big deal, this just means that I need to deal with a "do you want to restore" dialog every time Firefox starts up.
* Macbook Audio can't be muted.
  * This appears to be [a long-standing Ubuntu / Macbook bug](http://www.google.com/search?hl=en&q=macbook+audio+bug+ubuntu+mute&btnG=Search), due to the way Macbook audio muting is implemented. Someone needs to write a driver, and unfortunately audio driver writers don't seem to care much about Macbook laptops.

## Resolved Bugs

* Support for a one-button trackpad
  * Choose System:Administration:Synaptic
  * Use synaptic to install the mouseemu package to allow F11,F12 buttons to emulate middle and right mouse clicks.
* Phantom button clicks while moving the mouse:
  * Choose System:Preferences:Mouse:Touchpad
  * Un-check "Tap to Click".
  * Choose Close.
* Problems connecting to Windows Vista Printers and Windows Vista Shares:
  * See my post on this: [Linux in a Windows Centric Home Network](https://jackpal.github.io/posts/2007/10/Linux_in_a_Windows-centric_home_network/)

* Enable Cleartype-like nice looking anti-aliased fonts:
  * Choose System:Preferences:Appearence:Fonts
  * Choose "Subpixel Smoothing".

* Enable Java:
  * Choose System:Administration:Synaptic
  * Install sun-java6-jdk
* Enable Flash:
  * Choose System:Administration:Synaptic,
  * install ubuntu-restricted-extras.
  * This installs a bunch of useful software that should be in the default Ubuntu install, but isn't due to political differences between the software authors and the Ubuntu packagers.

[](http://note2.industriousone.com/mounting-windows-shares-ubuntu)
