---
date: 2020-12-28
tags: advent_of_code programming_competitions python swift
title: Advent of Code 2020
---

My college freshman son and I competed in this year's
[Advent of Code](https://adventofcode.com) coding competition. It was a
battle of youthful energy against wisdom & experience. I am somewhat chastened to
report that we scored about the same.😅

My son used Python, and didn't even use any of the fancier Python libraries or
language techniques. He also eschewed the debugger, doing all his debugging using
print() statements.

I used Swift & Xcode, and tended to use every feature of the language and libraries.

That we scored similarly probably shows that the two languages are evenly matched for the
kinds of problems that were given in this contest.

The Advent of Code puzzles typically come in two parts: The first part is usually easier,
the second part usually adds a twist that requires extending the original solution.

In looking back on the month, I think that, compared to my son, I typically
over-engineered my solutions. I introduced enums and structs and helper functions
where he used the built-in data types and copy-and-paste. This usually gave
him a signficant edge on the time to solve the first, "easier" problem.

My over-engineering sometimes paid off. I usually had easier debugging (due to
more typechecking), and sometimes it was easier to refactor my code for the "twist"
in problem two. Plus occasionally having a compiled language helped. Althoght not
that often. The AoC problems are designed to be solvable in short run times in Python,
even on old hardware.

My edge, the reason that I was competitive, was that I have enough experience that I
could usually figure out how to solve a given problem. In later days of the contest,
when the problems got harder, I felt that this was an unfair advantage, so I would
give my son a hint about what web searches to use to figure out a good way of
approaching the problem.

Overall we had fun. Shout out to the excellent
[r/adventofcode](https://www.reddit.com/r/adventofcode/) subreddit. Each day, after
we solved the puzzles ourselves, we would check in with the subreddit to see other
solutions.

# Improving my Swift skills

Using Swift to compete in AOC has encouraged me to
explore parts of Swift that I hadn't had a need to or chance to learn before.

+ String processing, and the relationship between String, Substring, and Character.
+ Regular expressions
+ `map`, `reduce`, `filter`, `forEach`, `compactMap` and occasionaly `flatMap`.
+ [Classic Algorithms](https://github.com/raywenderlich/swift-algorithm-club)
+ [SIMD](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/swift/simd) for points.
+ `typealias` for briefer code.
+ Generics for reusable algorithms.
+ [NSCountedSet](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/foundation/nscountedset)
+ `ArraySlice` and the various Ranges.
+ Creating Sets and Dictionaries the functional way rather than imperitively. 
+ Identifiable, RawRepresentable, Hashable, CaseIterable, CustomStringConvertible.
+ Sorting
+ Using value types as much as possible.

## Room for Improvement

Swift is a good languge for coding contests. Certainly much less verbose than many
other Java-like languages. However, there are still some speed-bumps compared to
Python or F#.

- String processing is verbose.
- Regular expressions are very verbose.
- The Swift standard library is missing many useful algorithms and collection classes.
- The tradeoff between debug builds and release builds.
  - Debug builds are slow.
  - Release builds are difficult to debug.

# Previous AoC contests

The [old Advent of Code contests](https://adventofcode.com/2020/events) are all still
"live". You can't get a timed score, but you can still enter and complete any contest.

I first did Advent of Code last year, but this year in addition to entering the 2020
contest I also completed all the earlier years' contests. r/adventofcode was a handy
resource for this task. There are archived posts for discussing the solutions to
each day's puzzles for every year's contest.
